PLT-682 ADR for the constraint interface change following support for reference inputs (#654)
input-output-hk/plutus-apps: doc/adr/0007-support-reference-inputs-in-constraint-library.rst

.. _support_reference_inputs_in_constraint_library:

ADR 7: Support reference inputs in constraint library
=====================================================

Date: 2022-08-09

Authors
-------

koslambrou <konstantinos.lambrou@iohk.io>

Status
------

Draft

Context
-------

After the Vasil HF, the Cardano blockchain will support `reference` inputs by adding a new field in the transaction data type.
With reference inputs, transactions can take a look at UTXOs without actually spending them.

Thus, we need to adapt our transaction constraint data type (`TxConstraints`) to support referencing UTXOs.

Decision
--------

* We will add the data constuctor `MustReferenceOutput TxOutRef` to the `TxConstraints` data type.

* The PlutusV1 on-chain implementation of this new constraint will simply return `False`.
  However, `cardano-ledger` throws a phase-1 validation error if transactions that use the some of the new features (reference inputs, inline datums and reference scripts) try to execute PlutusV1 scripts.
  See the `Babbage era ledger specification <https://hydra.iohk.io/job/Cardano/cardano-ledger/specs.babbage-ledger/latest/download-by-type/doc-pdf/babbage-changes>`_.

>   Therefore, this on-chain implementation should **never** result in a phase-2 validation error.

Reviewer: What does it mean that it will never result in a phase-2 validation error? It's important that it will be caught during the first phase?

Author: Basically, if the user tries to submit a transaction which:
- uses reference inputs, inline datums or reference scripts
- includes a V1 scripts

This will result in a phase-1 error by `cardano-ledger` - meaning that the transaction will fail before being submitted in the blockchain. If it was a phase-2 error, it means that the transaction will be part of the blockchain and will be failing (meaning collateral inputs will be used).

Reviewer: Oh, didn't know about the validation phases, thanks!

>   Therefore, this on-chain implementation should **never** result in a phase-2 validation error.

Reviewer 2: The ledger will only throw this phase-1 error in the presence of reference inputs, so the on-chain implementation should only result in a phase-2 validation error in the absence of the offchain constraint.

Author: Oh right! I'll rephrase this. Thanks :)

Author: How about the following?

```suggestion
  Therefore, the only to get a phase-2 validation error would be to use this constraint on-chain, without using any of the new features off-chain.
```

* The PlutusV2 on-chain implementation of this new constraint will check that the provided `TxOutRef` is part of the `ScriptContext`'s reference inputs.

Argument
--------

At first glance, we might think that we need two data constructors for reference inputs such as `MustReferencePubKeyOutput` and `MustReferenceScriptOutput` in contrast to the existing `MustSpendPubKeyOutput` and `MustSpendScriptOutput` constraints.

> However, we do not need to make the distinction between public key outputs and script outputs because we're not spending the output, therefore, we don't need to provide a redeemer nor the actual script as a witness to the transaction input.

Author: Yeah exactly. That's what I'm saying. We can just have `MustReferenceOutput TxOutRef` because we don't need to know the difference between a pubkey and script output.
